okay thank you everybody we're calling
this meeting to order this is the town
of Andover uh regular Board of Finance
meeting for Wednesday February
26th um we'll go ahead and start by
reciting the Pledge of Allegiance I
pledge allegiance to the flag the United
States of America and to the Republic
which it stands one
nation for all okay thank you uh our
first order of business is public speak
um see a couple potential members of the
public there uh we have a Katie
Dixon I'm all set thank you okay thank
you and Wally
owner yeah that's me Mark I'm on for
what is it five fire chief fire fire
fire commission
sorry okay
right okay if that's it I think we we
can go on to uh the next item which is
changes or additions to the
agenda uh if I don't know if anybody has
any other changes uh they want to
propose I would suggest that one thing
we could do is to move the budget
discussions up earlier in the in the
budget so that we can uh have the fire
uh commission and the Public Works
budget
discussions earlier and we can cut those
folks loose if they so choose so what I
would suggest is that maybe we uh move
that to item 5A instead of
5e um I'll go ahead and make that motion
does anybody want to Second it I'll
second it okay I saw Joan first thank
you any
discussion no good idea I was gonna
suggested to Mark okay all right we'll
go ahead and vote all those in favor say
I I I okay no opposed any extensions
thank you all right anybody want to
propose any other additions or changes
to the agenda Lise add that
ahm um
Municipal
voting if um I don't know if everyone
had a chance to view what I sent but uh
go ahead and kind of send along the vote
to them earlier than later
okay do we need to vote on that Eric I'm
trying to remember what we've done in
the past or Joan if you remember or is
that just part of our budget that we
vote on it I think we have in principle
voted on
it so Mark the town of Andover cast two
ballots there are six total votes right
passed by the board of Selectmen uh an
cre has decided she wants to be the rep
for the board of
Selectmen um and Lise Goodwin uh I think
attended the meeting so is likely the
the rep but normally it's voted on we
agreed on that yeah by the board of
finance and the board of Selectmen upper
now yeah okay I do remember that sorry
for the confusion yeah it's been a
couple weeks we did talk about that
clearly okay so Louise you want to add
that to the agenda specifically under I
guess that'd be under new
business yeah it's not a business so
item 6A then would be a vote on the
proposed ahm uh budget
contribution that sound right yes it
does okay well a vote on it
yes yeah and Mark I'm gonna suggest that
you add item 6B discussion of the bridg
in Culvert
fund um and I would also say unless you
really want to discuss it that we
probably don't need to review 5c uh
either item we could deal with it all in
discussion of bridg and culbert
fund okay so those are three proposed
changes right there do we want to just
put those all under the same motion
would you be okay with that Louise yes I
would okay anybody want to Second
That B okay any discussion
okay so the the motion is to add item 6A
which is toh consider the proposed
contribution of B over to the ahm budget
uh uh 6B would be the discussion of the
bridg and Culvert
fund right Eric could I state that
correctly correct and it would we also
proposing removing item 5c from the
agenda for
tonight okay okay discussion Joanne oh
I'll ask a question after we take a vote
or whatever okay all those in favor say
I I I any opposed any
extensions okay motion is passed thank
you okay Joan did you have something
else I just wanted to ask Mark so I know
we have specific items that we're going
to be discussing tonight can we once
we're done with the two presenters are
going to have our general budget
discussion then as well or yeah sure we
can just add it you know continue that
under 5e yeah yeah that's fine good or
even under board open discussion but
okay perfect yeah thank
you are there suggested
changes okay hearing none we will move
on to agenda item four which is the
approval of the meeting minutes we have
the meeting minutes from the tri board
meeting and also the meeting minutes
from uh January 22
2025 so would anybody like to make a
motion to approve one uh or the first
one which is the tri board meeting
minutes can I ask a question did I
apologize I've been checking email all
day and Liz had thought they weren't in
our packet were they not no they not in
the packet I think
yeah so it's it's kind of hard to
approve them if they're not in there and
yeah just to kind of look them over so
yeah I hadn't even gotten down that far
no that's fine she did bring up that
point today Eric is Kate not in the
office on Wednesdays I think she's on
vacation isn't she no Kate's a part-time
employee she doesn't work
Wednesdays yeah I think I think after
tomorrow she's on vacation right
tomorrow okay I remember saying
something about that yeah
yeah okay
so I guess we're just able to add well
go ahead Mark sorry just add him in the
next month's meeting yeah that's what I
I mean it was a little bit of a problem
right Liz did you want to speak to that
it was
your what the fact that the well it was
an incomplete packet and we set aside
time to review things and it just and we
get it Eric we're not making a big deal
about it but it's it's happened before
so yeah well we should have minut review
minutes and Liz brought up a few points
I don't want to take that away well and
also
the oh I already brought that one up the
uh the report for the quick report for
December 31st is it the same one that
was attached that we looked at last
month yeah Kate didn't have the we never
got uh out of the finance department the
updated check register so yep
but I mean is that typical I feel like
we always have have that at our monthly
meetings I understand they're probably
busy or whatever but that's something we
generally have so we can kind of know
where they
are right now the only thing the finance
director is focusing on is getting
through this year's audit frankly yeah
we're not being critical at all we're
just being informational and asking so
that we know that's all understand
everybody's busy I get that thank you
yep and and I should have caught the
fact that there were no minutes um in
the packet to be honest I never even
reviewed the packet um I was gone most
of Thursday in meetings so uh Kate just
sent the thing out so that's on us um
you know and and I would also admit that
we don't do nearly as good a job as we
used to um because now I don't have an
admin assistant I have a little bit of
time from the tax collector um when she
can fit in that kind of stuff and you're
right we Dro a lot of things now that we
didn't before Eric I wasn't going to go
here but since you went there listen as
an administrative assistant myself I
pride myself in good work so that's all
we we don't expect a lot but you got to
proofread your stuff especially when
you're sending it out didn't even want
to go there was trying to stay away from
it but you're trying to put it on budget
and cutting of hours it's just if you
take on a task and it's your task you
just have to proofread it but we get it
it's a mistake we'll look for everything
next month but I don't want to claim it
on anybody's Less hours or budget or
that it's just you've got to pride
yourself in your work all the time no
matter part-time full-time thank
you okay my video is acting up again so
we'll gonna just leave that off for now
um so it looks like we won't be able to
vote on the approval of the meeting
minutes if nobody has any objections
we'll move on to the old
business uh
and what we agreed on for 5A for old
business would be the budget discussions
with the Fire Commission uh and fire
department budget
so um I guess thing to do would be to
turn it over to uh Wall-E if you want to
comment or do you just want to entertain
questions from the board if you have any
general comments on the fire department
budget basically it's a small increase
this year $1,200
on the budget overall we move some items
around um partially due to losing two
trucks that we sold the rescue truck and
the oldest uh fire engine and uh we
still are awaiting the delivery of the
new Squad but we still don't have a firm
date on that and uh we found that some
of our equipment maintenance costs had
increased dramatically in the last year
so we move money from basically the
vehicle maintenance to uh the equipment
maintenance and increase that line item
slightly so we went from 167 150 to 169
350 for the annual
budget and I'm glad to answer any
questions anyone
has and then I think we also had a large
uh allocation for new turnout
gearar capital budget
yeah and the capital
budget capital budget was for scbas
self-contained breathing apparat oh
that's for the scbas okay that wasn't
part of our normal budget that was the
capital that went through CIP yeah if
you want to discuss that I have an
alternative
there I would love to discuss that
actually I would love to discuss that
yeah I would too thank you yeah normally
goes through CIP and then it ends up
with us in the yeah the uh Board of
selectman
so okay well originally we asked for 20
new sets of air packs and those were to
replace units that were purchased in the
1980s late 80s and early
90s we've been having maintenance issues
with them and our cost of repairs is
dramatically increased for the vendor to
come and pick them up and bring them in
to repair them we're even getting a fuel
charge every time they have to bring
anything in for repairs so they are
showing their age so our original
proposal was for 20 sets of air packs
and then
new Kevlar straps for both the new Air
packs and there
are 20 air packs out that have been
assigned to Firefighters that are
certified
and they wanted to upgrade those straps
and the total on that was 221
992 we understand that because the truck
is coming in sometime this year and the
first payment is going to be
substantial we're looking to possibly
change this from 20 sets to 16 which
replaces just the ones that we have on
the apparatus and 36 sets of
straps and that comes out to
170,000
$535
36 and these yeah go ahead can you repl
can you repeat that you're willing to
change it to 16 of the packs and then
what and 36 sets of the straps we
originally wanted 40 sets of these
Kevlar strap
so now that would drop from 20 to 36 I
mean from 40 to 36 excuse me thank you
and and Wally um are all of the um air
packs 80s and 90s Are there any newer
air packs stall
no the other problem is that when you
change a model air pack the new
ones have dramatic differences than what
we have now so you can't mix and match
and the whole concept there is at 3:00
in the morning we get a structure fire
now to have someone respond and say okay
which air pack am I putting on and you
know what are the
differences when we want to make the
switch we want to at least switch all of
them that were actively on the fire
apparatus so they're all the same when
someone goes to put it on they're all
the same no mix and match
and while if I recall correctly from CIP
the reason originally for wanting 20 is
that 16 gets you loaded up on the trucks
but the the extra four were for sending
people out for training or if you have a
unit under repair that's correct and
whenever anyone goes to things like
firefighter one certification they're
required to bring their own air pack and
spare bottle with them and the concept
was if we had spares and we had those
available to go for training they
wouldn't be taken off the apparatus and
that was the original idea with the 20
but I understand that there have been
questions because of the cost
factor and and I have another question
and the reason that you need 36 is
because what we have 36 certified
firefighters or we have 20 firefighters
that have been issued their own
mask okay because they're all certified
so their mask is with them so when they
go to grab the pack their mask is with
them to put it on the other masks are
with the
apparatus there are three sizes of a
Scot air pack mask and those people that
are certified have one that's fit tested
to them specifically with their specific
size with the ones that are on the
apparatus they were all either mediums
are large and hope that they fit
properly on the other firefighters that
would be wearing
them that's why we're looking for the
additional uh 20 sets of straps to
upgrade the masks for those
firefighters okay further
questions well what was the total cost
if you bought just 16 of them 16 of them
uh total with the 36 straps comes out to
[Music]
53536 that's doing the math from the
original quote from
Mees and Erica I'm sorry the line item
are we talking about the fire engine
fund tanker for for using utilization
for the um right yes that is the
Standalone fund for the fire department
yeah and the the current amount in the
budget right now is 137,000
even correct but that's just what we
annually fund the current balance of the
fund is around
$400,000 okay so it can accommodate the
first Year's payment for the for the
squad vehicle plus the purchase of the
air packs okay it just drains the fund
pretty
considerably
yeah Eric if I can ask when we put that
was a question I was going to did we
have the funds available for the lease
that was approved or that you know the
funding for the fire tank or the first
payment if it goes through the town
meeting is it in this budget that we
already put a line item in
or did you did you budget for that I
just I don't have it open right now did
we add to that line item this year
anticipating the
lease uh We've since I've been here
we've been trying to level fund it at
about
125,000 or a little more per year some
years it gets cut from gets cut but
that's what the ask is um and the ask
went up last year to
137 right when the town had made the
decis decision to purchase the squad
vehicle because we knew that was
approximately that would cover the lease
payment plus a little bit extra okay and
these items are detailed I just opened
it up and they are detailed in the uh
Capital fund summary that was Erica
provided a link to that and I think we
also maybe distributed that we did so
there was a there was a tab called fire
engine fund and you can see the two
items in there replac them with the SCBA
gear which is for the full amount I
think not the amount that Wally talked
about the reduced amount but um and then
there's a loan payment for the squad uh
vehicle
so and I know we already touched on this
in in Prior meetings but Wally it's you
feel it's important to do it all at once
and it's we can't peace meal it together
even
though no
yeah mixing and matching just leads to
an accident happening sometime early in
the morning at a structure fire and
someone getting hurt and I don't think
the town wants to open itself up to that
liability at all and I probably didn't I
sorry if I said Peace meal I don't mean
different pie but if we got 10 that were
the corrected way and then kept them in
a certain area there there's just no way
around it you you no there's still
mixing and matching
okay one some new ones
yeah so this has gotten through CIP
right Rob in the form that Wally's
discussing or
no yes sorry I was e uh yes we approved
the original
ask of the
22192 okay all right Wally had Show and
Tell for us it was uh was educational
he brought out one of the old
ones so I guess the question ends up
being um do we need to take action on
this at this point or is this going to
be a future uh you know are we going to
line this up with a formal request that
you know details what's happening and
how much
Etc well we have the exact figure for
the
16 so we could in theory vote to change
that in the budget right to reflect well
yeah the budget's one thing but it's
also the expenditure for the fcba gear
are we being asked to do that at this
point sorry that's what I
meant and does I have to go to a town
approval town meeting for approval
or uh I
don't go ahead Eric so that does not
have to go to town meeting because it's
already money that is approp orated
through the standard annual
taxation
process um if we were taking out a loan
to buy it it would absolutely need to go
but if it's existing
monies um then no in monies that have
been designated for that purpose which
is uh what's happened here we're
spending it exactly for the reason we
put that money away for so no it does
not and W if I if I may ask ask another
question do we find that andover's way
behind other towns I mean do are we
using such obsolete equipment
or no I mean that's that's important
because I know when we talk about trucks
or different things like that we hear
things and then we try to make judgments
obviously I think Public Safety and and
safety you know of our firefighters and
anybody that's going to be in a position
like that is so important so that just
popped into my head how far behind are
we with the equipment we have now you
know with our surrounding towns are we
kind of on an equivalent and then we're
looking
to yeah some have newer equipment some
have older equipment okay so we're not
the oldest dinosaur out there there's
other towns that are operating with this
equipment and we've been I know it's
been on your list for a while we we got
a lot of the budget backup info so um
thank you I just well you opened up a a
Pandora's Box now you're gonna hear my
soap oper speech we just got rid of a
truck that was purchased in 1989 we got
$4,000 for that vehicle we got rid of a
rescue truck that was purchased in
1998 we got 25,000 for
that it isn't that we're ahead or behind
of anybody body around
us some have more equipment some have
more members so therefore things like
air packs they have more of
them most of them are all operating
Scott Air packs a lot of them have
upgraded what they have we've maintained
these and the ones that we have in
service now are still
functional as long as we keep
maintaining them but we're looking to
improve for the future
and again before they fail we'd rather
get them replaced so there's my soap up
Soap Box no we appreciate that I it's I
I know nothing about this so you know
I've got to ask the basic questions so
the functional you know it is an upgrade
and you know it's a decision you know of
we definitely want the firefighters to
have them eventually it's just is this
the year that it it goes that's all I'm
not I'm not proposing either way I think
it's just thank you w-e okay Wally yeah
do you do you have a breakdown you said
that the maintenance of them is is
becoming more costly do you have a
breakdown
of what that looks like not at my
fingertips right
now basically inside these Regulators
there a lot of small pieces and parts
and and they fail after so many
years you
can't forecast when you're going to have
an issue it's when the air packs are
tested every month if there's a problem
that air packs pulled out of service the
vendor is called they come pick it up
take it back to their shop put it on
their bench take it apart find the
problem make the repairs and send it
back but no I don't have a breakdown in
front of me it's just that over the past
couple years it's become more frequent
that we're sending air packs out for
repairs and they are becoming more
costly to have the repairs
done basically part of that's inflation
what they're paying the technician has
gone up considerably plus Transportation
plus parts like anything you buy to
inflation is killing
everything y thank you
yep well I mean could you give a
ballpark figure what that is is it like
hundreds or is it thousands every time
you have them fixed do you have any
they're
basically because of the transportation
and labor that's involved we're talking
a couple hundred dollars every time we
send one out for
repairs and you can't forecast the five
are going to have to go out this year
and 10 next year it's it's a runto fail
system when they don't work when they're
tested they're taken out of service and
sent for repairs they are annually flow
tested which is required by NFPA so
again Mees comes up sets up a test bench
and all of our units are tested for the
flow rate to make sure that they're
operating properly so you can't predict
when you're going to have an issue
basically thank you
yep and they are inspected yearly like
you said um they're tested annually
they're inspected monthly oh
okay I don't know how anyone else feels
and I certainly am not the spokesman on
this I don't mind leaving it on the
table right now and and coming back to
it as we move along in our budget
discuss questions unless someone feels
strongly that I mean I'm putting it out
there I think we're at the very very
beginning of you know last week we gave
an overview of we knew it was a tough
budget year I know Mark wasn't present I
don't know if he listened in after you
know it's a big ass this year all around
so to make a decision on a big item
right now I'm not too comfortable with
it yet I'd like to keep it in for now
and come back to it yeah well I I would
yeah a couple things that's probably
works well I mean there's two things one
is that the and just to keep in remember
keep in mind for all of us the amount
that's going into the uh the the fire
department fund on the budget line item
is is is one issue and that will just be
part of our regular budget discussions
but then the expenditure out of the
capital fund for a major expense like
this is just a regular routine issue so
that money is as we've said is already
there and as Eric pointed out and and it
isn't as I said in the summary the
capital fund summary now typically
though um what I what I would like to
see and I would agree with you and we
pass on it for now um would would be
like a formal request to say okay here's
our quote this is what we're buying this
is what it's going to cover um and um
it's going to cost this much we have the
funds available here's our phone request
to do that so I think that that's
strictly what we would get in before
approving any large capital expenditure
so um so w was able to talk about both
things today but I think ultimately to
to approve the capital expenditure we
would want to see the the quotes from
the vendors and the the rationale kind
of in a written request um as we often
do so you know to to me it makes sense
to to hold off on anything until we see
that formal quote and that's just part
of our routine business isn't
necessarily part of the budget process
although obviously such expenditure is a
big deal um and then the 137,000 this
proposed to continue to fund the uh fire
department Capital fund uh is part of
the normal budget discussion so so to me
it makes sense to wait and you know
while they gave us some really good
background that'll give us a good
context for when we get a formal request
um and exactly what they're looking for
and how much uh which will be equal or
less than the amount that's in the uh
uh in the uh Capital fund summary Mark
if I may you talk about vendors there is
only a single vendor in the entire state
of Connecticut for Scott airpack so yeah
I can get you the the new quote it's 16
instead of 20 if that's what you're
looking for and get that through to Eric
and he can get it to you people yeah
that would be good and I think just an
overall uh just a letter Wall-E that
just kind of explains the rationale for
it that it's gone through CIP CIP has
approved it we know that through Rob
already because he talked about it um
and then just attach the quote and then
we can take action on it all right I can
do that okay good thank you Wally thanks
Wally yeah Wally are there warranties on
those right excuse me are there are
there warranties on those items parts
and labor is a couple of years but again
our stuff is over 30 years old
so okay it's well beyond any warranty
that would be out
there okay but when you buy new ones yes
they do have a warranty that comes with
them first year is full replacement of
all parts and anything that's wrong with
it beyond that it's
pro-rated is there a service like a
service agreement that comes with new
equipment so no there's only the one
vendor in the state of Connecticut and
he Services what he sells and he's the
only vendor out there so we're pretty
much stuck with what he charges is what
we have to pay
for Monopoly thank you close to it yeah
when you're a special the equipment like
that
yeah uh just to close loop on this Just
One Last Thing Mark real quick so uh if
memory serves Eric you said that we had
about 400,000 in the fund if we add 137
that gets you up to 537 but that's
designed to make that's designed to
match the lease payment right the 137 so
you're back down to 400 and then if you
spend 170 you're about 230 am I am I
right yeah the Le the loan payments is
172 okay so there like an additional
$111,000 in there which I was assume
would be to build up funds for
additional equipment purchases or
Replacements like this one over time you
net out to about 240 then in the
fund so no it's balance of the fund
$430,000 430 okay plus yeah 137 yeah add
137 to that you get
567,000
if you take off the money the loan
payment yeah plus the replacement of the
SCBA gear combined totals 29 $
5,77 okay um which leaves around
$272,000 uh plus you're then adding at
the current rate of funding the fire
department equipment rate you're adding
to that fund at about
$11,000 a year so right what that's
saying basically is that over the next
10 years other than what the commitment
is for the squad and the commitment for
the SCBA you're going to have about
$378,000 um in 10 years for for anything
else that comes down the pike yeah
that's I just wanted to get my arms
around that because obviously things
come up there's there's going to be
something else at some point so I just
kind of wanted to know where we'd be at
net so thank you for
that no doubt and that is probably not
enough to cover the next 10 years needs
of the the fire fire department so at
some point um that's going to that
Capital fund is probably going to have
to be increased to meet the needs of the
fire
department or
not if I can just add to that inflation
has killed the fire service when we
originally talked about buying the squad
it was
$750,000 now it's over a million and
every year you're looking at 10 to 15%
increases in fire service equipment it's
ridiculous but it's kind of where we're
at so when you talk about the future you
got to think that these prices are just
climbing every
year that's good information thanks
Paul any other questions or comments
before we move
[Music]
on okay hearing none I guess we'll move
on with our agenda thank you OE we
appreciate your time and the explanation
I think that was very helpful all right
I'll get that information to uh Eric and
he can pass it on to you guys thank you
thank you thanks well have a good
night okay we will move on to item 5 A2
which is now the Public Works budget
discussion we have Jay with us here um
and I think uh just for reference if you
have your spreadsheets open then this
would be roughly rows 253 to
267 uh we also have snow removal below
it which is probably pertinent as well
so Eric I don't know if you have
anything intro or do we want to uh just
uh talk to Jay about
it Joanne are we able to share it on the
screen like we usually do or do you yeah
either or can or I can thank you
you want me to share it I can share
it'll do that now
thanks okay I don't know where you want
to start Jay you have the Town garage up
right
now SEC don't see
it there we go okay
I'm gonna have to move in a lot closer
hi
everybody
hello okay so we're on the
garage all right
uh sorry I can't see looks like it's a
fairly flat budget overall I have it
down a little bit Yeah I presented to
Eric a flat Budget on this uh the same
amount 35 845 is that correct
yes for for the Town
garage
34575 yeah that's the yeah
yeah
34 yeah the 35 was the corrected current
year budget I think what you're looking
at Jay yeah so column J is what we're
proposing for next budget
year okay well I'm I apologize I
I can't even see it so can you zoom in a
little Eric or no Jay we totally
understand I had to run the meeting last
week and I could not see I had my
magnifying glass out see anything no
problem it's not easy he's gonna add
$150 of the budget for a new monitor oh
that's
better there you go maybe well I was say
maybe shrink it just a little
bit no I like it that big but I can't
see all the columns so right well I
just you
narrow goe go ahead yeah I just moved
the whole computer closer to my
face H all
right yeah there's there's not much I
can really uh say on any of this other
than um you know we're doing we're doing
okay with with the the
garage uh since you know a few years of
uh being here we've uh been trying to uh
uh do little improvements as we go along
on the interior clean things up around
the building do some maintenance and
whatnot and and we just a little bit of
a Peck and Order and and
um uh we're good with this
budget
um I don't know about electric and and
uh
you know the fuel's gone up a little bit
or stay steady but uh we haven't really
had seen any increases in there so
that's unless you have some questions
about it that's pretty much all I got
for the build and
maintenance you're actually you're
actually lowering lowering the the
budget for electricity and fuel oil that
because you guys are typically just
using less than you
expected so that's that's the
electricity is always a guess because we
have no idea that's just based on the
fact that the state has been going after
Pura and it looks like the
overall uh rates for electricity are
going to go down somewhat I mean you
know although those contracts haven't
even been negotiated yet so we really
don't have a firm guess as far as fuel
oil that's assuming the same consumption
of fuel oil at now but this year's rate
that we lock locked in at is 262 a
gallon um which is lower than what we
had available last year yeah okay that
makes sense it's not a lot of money I'm
just ask
sure anybody have any other questions on
this uh area the Town garage I just
wondering J like under Building
Maintenance you has 17,850 is there any
specific items that we're planning on
for that for maintenance uh well right
now we have some uh you know we're doing
an airline replacement project we've got
we've got a couple of doors we need to
replace and I'm talking about this
year's project
um and next year we you know I want to
do a couple more doors exterior doors um
these are rollup doors uh no no not the
rollup more more entry doors okay we
actually do we do have one door we we
need to get done but um we're just
waiting to see what we have for for
balances on that um we have uh you know
some minor exterior stuff that we do
along the way so
um yeah just making improvements you
know we put in an airline um a hydraulic
hose uh bench in this year and and
station so we in an emergency we can do
some hydraulic hoses uh in the middle of
the night if we have to um not for
everything but just kind of a minor um
small setup uh so yeah we've just been
bit making little improvements here and
there thank you also the basic building
they're in dates back to the
1850s so there is a fairly high level of
ongoing maintenance of dealing with that
building
go ahead yeah qu you did you have a
question Joanne or I was just gonna say
are we gonna scroll down like area by
area and then yeah probably just go to
the next area if nobody's got any
questions here see I I have one question
can I ask one question I
see am I good go ahead Liz yeah yeah so
uh just because I'm curious um I mean
it's a negative but it uh says under
electricity potentially swapping out
electric baseboards is that like putting
in new ones would that be would that
fall under Building
Maintenance no if if you looked at the
the capital one of the things we are
proposing spending out of for either the
building maintenance fund um or
potentially using our lowp funding for
is to change out the HVAC system in the
front in the office area of Public Works
because right now is there's a single
window mounted AC unit um which is the
only Cooling in the office area and the
heating system for the whole front is
electric
baseboard um and doing that primarily
because a ductless split system runs
considerably more efficiently in terms
of cost for the amount of heating or
Cooling that you get than resistance
electric key or a
wallmounted uh AC unit so it's the same
thing we just did in the town hall and
the fire department and essentially for
the same
reason okay
gotcha thank
you okay so we've scrolled down to the
public works section um
okay so go ahead I'm I'm good go ahead I
was just noticing the the column uh
uncertainty about Jay leaving and just
wondering have we got anything more
concrete there and what are we looking
at as far as that
goes so I've been in discussions with
Eric um and uh have yet to get
confirmation from the from the selectman
so if if I'm
my proposal if I follow the the uh uh
the increase in salary along with the
rest of the staff then I I would stay
another two
years perfect thank you Jay
yeah I guess I have a question mark if I
may yep go ahead Jo Eric I don't know
have we I know the selectman had that
special meeting last night and made some
decisions on a couple of things has the
spread she been updated yet accordingly
or yep it is I looked at it
today do you the one that you sent in
our budget documents the link that you
sent is that the one we should be
referring to
now so the updated spreadsheet is in
that link today yeah there there
actually are two spreadsheets there just
you have to look at the date on each one
I think it's the one dated the
25th okay I did
okay I I didn't see it on all the tabs
changed I'll I'll take a look later I
had been looking at it okay if it's up
to date with all the information thank
you now I'm trying to look at this
closer and as far as the uh uh the rest
of the uh uh line items within the
operating uh many of them are running
flat uh couple of them we uh lowered Cu
uh
one I can think specifically we we had a
a large purchase last year weon say
large but we purchased several sets of
tires um which we don't normally do in a
year uh this year I think I only have
one set of tires uh uh slated uh to
purchase other than keeping a little
money set aside for tire repairs and if
we have to buy a tire um and uh so
that
uh uh other than the um
wages um I had that uh budget
approximately up 2% from last year in
total um combined because some areas we
um you know like I said we're less and
some areas were a little bit
more yeah I'm see the total Public Works
about 4% increase there's a negative
almost $4,300 in vehicle maintenance so
that's probably we were talking about
for the uh for the tires right so yeah
you have you you have the operating as a
4% increase well I'm looking at the I'm
looking at the spreadsheet that was on
there dated the 25th and it had
4.1% so maybe that maybe that wasn't up
updated okay I'll look at the I know the
I know the snow budget's up a little bit
no I I'll look at the screen I I clearly
mine's not the same as what Eric's
showing so so the reason that
budget uh is showing lower now is that
um with the decision by the board of
Selectmen not to
increase uh one member from maintainer
one to maintainer two that drops around
11,000 bucks out of the budget
um which is why it is what it is okay
all right
thanks yeah I didn't have that in my
original presentation to uh to Eric that
was added afterward that's so yeah that
would be You' be seeing 4% yep
okay I have a quick question Jay this
this line here I mean I know you have
the capital funds too this equipment
here that's funded from
8,000 what does that
cover uh what line are you looking at um
sorry
um5 yeah row
yeah
so I'm trying to find how I can minimize
the screen so I can get into
my uh so under under
equipment uh I list I ah I can't get in
hang on a second no problem is there
anything over Eric if you shift it over
does it give an explanation I'm just
trying to uh the explanation is not
there what Jay is alluding to is DPW
keeps its own master sheet of exp here I
go y all right I can tell you exactly
what it is
here operating
okay equipment consists
of uh I split equipment into three line
items for myself to keep track of so I
take that
$8,000 I have equipment tools so
miscellaneous tools could be a wrench
could be a wheelbarrow shovel oh yeah
$3,000 for
that uh signs in traffic control items
could be a sign
cones any traffic uh $3,500 for that and
the other equipment line item is radios
I try to keep
$1,500 uh for that so I take that $8,000
and I split it up okay if that makes
8,000 yep the total of the three
different categories that you told us
okay correct all right and and I do the
same thing with vehicle
maintenance I take vehicle maintenance
and I put
$29,000 for that and for tires this year
I earmarked
5,450 which gives me the
34450 um supplies up to that er sorry
okay go no can you show us where that
what line would that be okay the
34450 vehicle maintenance right okay so
vehicle maintenance has been
we've been pretty good over the past few
years you know since we've been uh
rebuilding making some upgrades and
keeping our equipment up to date and you
know and maintaining things in a good
manner we're we've been using up that
$29,000 is um and like you said tires uh
I try to keep uh
$2500 for like tire repairs by a tire so
the
added cost from the would be uh
2450 something like that um or
750 anyway got I'm not a good math
unless I do know what but that would be
to purchase the other
tires um supplies I ask how many
vehicles how many vehicles is Public
Works responsible
for right
hang we might as well learn Le if we're
going to be on you know every year a
little sinks in yeah so um if you
remember last year I sent you and I can
send it again this year because I made
it an update um is a that uh Capital
purchase plan so at at the last tab
tells you the registered vehicles of the
town oh minus the fire department so we
have assigned to us uh from from the
motor vehicle department 24 plates 1
through 24 and right now we currently
have and this includes uh the uh
three I'm sorry uh two senior Vans not
the buses just the the vehicles so out
of the 24 plates we have one two three
four spares so we have 20 Vehicles okay
equipment you know and vehicles truck
that are that are
registered okay that but that's not
including uh some of you know the
smaller equipment that's not driven on a
road like the skid steer we don't that's
not registered right um although we do
use it on the road
occasionally
um yeah okay no that covers it I wanted
to know and then because you talked
about it's just come up in a variety of
meetings that some of us have been
attending so I just might as well ask
you thank you for coming um do we have
because I know you talked about there's
you and now you hired the new guy last
year so now we have like the two groups
that go out and you have you know two
groups of two two guys together that can
go out on a job do we have someone that
is mechanically inclined I think you had
spoken to that last year so do we have
like a mechanic on site there that does
these small repair that's what I think
you're alluding to right keep yep so you
don't Outsource everything right yeah
the person we hired was two years ago oh
and that was the the uh last employee
two years almost three years now um and
uh the mechanic the one that's came from
uh uh fire service repair okay so he's
been doing General Mechanics for quite a
while um and uh our maintainer one so
he's a maintainer two our maintainer one
is also uh a mechanic welder fabricator
so we have two people that are very
capable um and but we have limitations
due to electronics of these vehicles and
you know they just have to go to a place
where the computer can read them um
fortunately we have a vendor uh that on
occas oion when we have the need
specifically for some of our Frontline
plow trucks um they'll actually come out
with their computer and and do a read
right here in our shop and if it's an
easy Diagnostic and he can point out the
part we'll fix it but if it's something
that has to go to their shop do to
because you do a repair then it's got to
be reprogrammed and all that that's got
to go to a to a vendor to do um we don't
have the capability to do that it's very
costly to be able to do that just to
maintain that
software um annually you know you're
talking about A1 to 15,000 just to start
up to have the ability to do it and then
you got to maintain it for about six
grand a year we only have four vehicles
that uh need that and it's once in a
blue moon so it's really not worth the
cost of having it so we do have our
limitations but we are very capable shop
and and all of us will chip in and fix
things you know everybody will grease it
everybody can wrench you know change a
tire do brakes do whatever we can all do
that we all help out so a lot of that is
done in okay yeah oh yeah oh yeah I
thought so when youve spoke into it but
since this whole maintenance fund you
know had a topic had been talked about
at one of the meetings I'm in so I was
in yeah I mean it's it's really
important that we have that ability and
what's nice is uh we all have something
to contribute everybody has uh expertise
and some more than others and and others
you know they like wrenching they like
greasing and others like being the real
mechanic yeah so you know they learn on
a job there you go little on training
that's awesome no thank you for that
explanation
okay um the other part of this is
supplies the big ticket item I don't
know if you look at at that at all at
$20,000 so that I have split into one
two three four
categories which would be supplies for
the
shop supplies would uh Lube in filters
supplies for the
sweeper
[Music]
and where's the other one oh yeah supply
shop lubben filters Supply sweep ERS oh
uniforms uniform and safety so that
would be your PPE uniforms and
PPE and that's typically uh uh you know
the the higher amount of that
20,000
so one who knows nothing about that line
of business that sounds like a lot of
money and I'm just saying right out
there I know nothing about what this
stuff costs but I'm like holy Mac roll
$20,000 for that one yeah well you know
it's it's it's split up into five
categories uh un I mean I if you want to
know how I have it split up I've got
7500 year marked for uniforms in uh
PPE um it's you know
gloves uh Safety Shoes our
uniforms
um covers
uh there's some other
miscellaneous I'd have to open it up to
tell you what we spent money on it but
um you know that that stuff gets costly
uh supplies for the sweeper brooms
basically is what I use that money for
um sometimes it might be a miscellaneous
part because I can squeeze it in there
but most most of that for the sweepers
just
brooms uh lubben filters uh lubri ation
and filters for all the equipment $5,000
for that oh I'm sorry 2500 for the sweep
supplies for the
sweeper 5,000 for lubben filters and
5,000 for miscellaneous supplies for the
shop nuts and bolts brake clean Rags
uh
wipers um just miscellaneous things to
have for the
equipment and you do go through that I
mean I understand I know car maintenance
very well in this household so I get how
expensive that is but um I mean there's
never a stockpile I'm not picky uning
but like you said some of the things
like the the gloves or anything there's
not a year that you're like oh we're
stocked up or whatever you just you go
through this amount pretty much every
year this is oh yeah well you know we'll
go through a a dozen couple dozen of
gloves a year you know depends on what
what we what's going on um and I try to
keep a a dozen in the in the uh cabinet
you know so we have them throughout the
year and then we replace them yeah
um the let's see I can do
this well my big deal is I am glad that
you guys do a lot of the maintenance on
the vehicles in the shop because that
that would be
incredible that's a savings right there
that you have mechanic people right
there but anyways back to that yeah
the
de now I got lots of papers in my lap
that I had to move the
computer so I'm kind of lost my place
okay uh my
notes yeah so
uh one of the things that I was putting
together um to kind of give you an idea
and this maybe I I mean you brought it
up Joanne um uh this could be part of
another discussion for the uh Capital
Equipment but
um two two vehicles over the past three
years uh and I'll bring it up so
uh our 2014 Peter bill
um well well you know what let me get
not get ahead of myself let's let's
finish this uh operating budget up if
you if that's okay that's fine um and if
you have any other questions about
it specific questions on the Public
Works line
items I guess Jay alluded to it Mark
earlier about the snow removal budget
was up I know that it seems oh yeah we
got a snow yeah this year I feel like
for a while you guys it was like Sundays
you know I mean so I'm sure there was a
lot of overtime involved listen I have
someone that goes out during those
storms too so there was a lot of Sundays
and and things like that so they all
kind of fell on overtime weekend
holidays I think too um all of our
storms this year so are we still within
budget this year and is that why it went
up um or just as far as I know we're
still within
budget um as far as because I haven't
gotten sorry gotten is not a good word
received uh the uh information back from
you know to doing my next quarterly
reconciliation hasn't come up yet so as
of last time we're okay so speaking to
the overtime and you know Sundays and
holidays I mean it's it is what it is it
is I mean I know do it you know
absolutely the last people are happy
that earned that paycheck I understand
the last time that was that we were uh
23 hours straight go home for six hours
and we were back for another five six
hours you know just because of the
timing of the day um and uh you know to
do some additional cleanup and because
it iced up but anyway yeah uh the
snow well again we're still are we're
done with the operating
before oh sorry I I got ahead of myself
yeah I think we if nobody has any other
questions on the on the Public Works
operational budget we can move on to
snow removal too
yeah know if if you really wanted to it
depends on you know I can send you my
spread a spreadsheet of itemized how I
keep track of everything because I
itemize everything out I keep track of
all the bills and you know you can see
how the expenditures happen over a
year's time and we're we're right within
the realm of what we're asking for and
what we're you know we're trying to find
that spot where we're pretty much
running flat you know first couple of
years we had a little bit of increase
now we're starting to even out and we're
you know kind of running Steady As She
Goes I
feel which which is nice it makes my job
a little bit easier
here and you said I guess I just I want
to refer back the the last man that you
hired that was not last year that was
two years
ago more than two years
ago yes so you've had a crew of five
Public Works guys
for the last I thought that was
something new that's fine we could I
mean but that's been going steady for a
few years than you're saying okay oh
yeah yep right
yep I've only been on the board you know
one term so I'm this is my fourth year
so it's somewhere within there yeah okay
thank you that's all I have for
these just as a reference point I know
it's all of our snow really most of came
in uh came in uh February but um if you
looked at the uh the January end of
January uh snow budget we'd only spent
we spent less than $155,000 out of a
$997,000 budget so we're pretty much way
under but of course a lot of that I'm
sure got chewed up in h in February and
the Winner's not over yet so well here's
here's the kicker to this because I'm
gonna I'm gonna just blow it all up all
right yeah I wondered it looked pretty
low I thought maybe we got lucky I I am
ass salt
hoarder because for specific reasons all
right and this year was a perfect
example um quite a few years ago not
here but you know my one of my previous
employers uh you know there was ass salt
shortage State shut us down we couldn't
get any more salt everybody was
scrambling you know so I managed the
salt very
carefully and because of that so last
year um at the end of the season because
I've been slowly increase since I
started I've been slowly increasing the
amount of salt we have at the end of the
year so we have a good charge of it to
go into the following year and we're
going to replace that salt as we go on
so long story short at the end of the
year I had 700 ton in the barn last year
to start this year so as we went along
uh you know we got through the face of
it we got in the couple hundred ton then
I split it you know so I was using one
half or one side and you know just
anyway uh we ended up I figured we had
about roughly 200 ton left in the barn
and I ordered salt lo and behold can't
get it we're having a problem get it it
was trickling in a truck at a time you
know one truck a week rather than uh you
know getting the whole thing within a
few days um so little bit scary uh I
still had some salt resered when that
all happened and all of a sudden no more
snow now we're getting salt back again
we're getting so and I'm going to be
filling up the barn and chewing up that
what you see as a
reserve um I just posted some bills for
$177,000 uh for salt uh then I've got
another 400 ton already ordered so
that'll be another roughly 36$ 38,000
for that so we will chew up that salt
budget real fast yeah that is your
biggest line item right in that yeah
correct yeah uh
more Yep so I increased that the cost of
salt
to uh
$98 a ton I think I anticipate hopefully
it doesn't get to you know it's it's all
a guessing game you know I added a few
dollars a ton compared to this year this
year we're at
9406 I believe it is a
ton
um
so we
contract
annually with our with whoever our
supplier is um we we uh uh piggyback on
the kog bids you know uh so basically
does the bidding for us uh with all the
different vendors out
there
um and then we contract for 800 ton and
we've
been
uh budgeting for 700
tonish so I asked for uh 7 to budget for
700 ton at $98 a ton and I rounded it to
$68,000 over last year's budget which
was what
65 what was last year's budget
6650 or
66500 so I bumped it up to
$68,000 um and then some of the other
increases you know it just uh increased
for the plow blades um I earmarked some
and cost of Steel is skyrocketed so that
went up from $3,200 to $4,800 for this
year
um left sanding equipment
flat meals
flat sand flat we're going to have to
purchase some sand this year because we
used quite a
bit um the the residents uh you know we
we kept uh sand salt in the our manger
in here so they could come and get some
sand because boy things iced up pretty
bad uh and wages were up a little bit uh
so that's how I went from
the uh last year at
uh was it 90 90 something it was last
year I I'm forget
now to the
100 802 if that's what you're seeing yes
yes just under $4,000 increase yeah yeah
so the bulk of that is is the is the
salt um and I'm just anticipating higher
prices
um you know delivery cost
supplies uh yeah
okay think about this thank you the town
of Andover is in a typical year puts
down between a million and a half and a
mil and 2 million pounds of salt on our
roads
wow the poor vehicles but we need it I
get it
yeah anybody have any further questions
for Jay on the snow removal budget
no no a okay what else we have that it
for
him Eric do we usually I don't know or
Mark do we usually have Jay around do we
have any Capital fund questions for him
or is that more us I don't know since
he's
here so the Public Works capital budget
right now as budgeted is basically just
enough to carry right the loan costs for
the one of the trucks that we're still
paying off and the roadside mower right
so it's pretty much right I remember
looking at it it's it's covered and
funded so no I just wanted to make sure
while we had him yeah it's uh the the
line item in the budget for this year is
125k which is flat um with the last
year and the note is level funding
assuming no equipment purchases so okay
so
if if I'm is it okay if I touch base on
that yeah absolutely it's a good time
okay so um just so you're
aware
uh the end of this year uh
audited um we were in the rears
89,4 197 we were in deficit so the
2425 allocated funding at $125,000
became
35,50 28 for the year and that's how
much we have
going that's how much we have currently
to pay the next two uh lease
payments okay so what we're
proposing is that the next two lease
payments which are due
uh March 10th and I believe June 10th of
this
year uh will be paid out of the tar
account Town Aid road so we don't have a
deficit again in the equipment Reserve
fund so let's back up and let's explain
that yes so this is the we had a truck
lease and a tractor lease two line items
in the equipment fun from the
summary yes that's referring to right
okay that were that were paid this year
in the beginning but then through the
audit it had to be those payments had to
be moved
to uh
2324 fiscal year I'll explain why
we entered into an agreement to purchase
the roadside mower um which shows up on
the budget as the tractor lease with the
understanding that it would be in the
current fiscal
year however per the auditor that even
though uh that was the agreement with
the leasing company and no payment was
due last year right because we actually
took delivery of the vehicle in the last
fiscal year we had to back
that audit which kind of screwed us not
screwed us it's the same amount of money
um it's just because it was pushed off
one year and the way we're going to do
it is we're going to take the money out
of the Town Aid Road fund which is
perfectly acceptable to spend on
vehicles to get us current so it doesn't
look every year like we're starting the
year off uh in debt so basically just
Advance the schedule of payments from an
accounting perspective correct and then
the last year we won't have that thing
we won't have it showing correct it will
come
back for that matter if we wanted to do
it that
way
okay right but was the whole reason that
we purchased it the way we did because
we thought the funds were available in
that year and then they W or like you
said the auditor wasn't in favor of the
plan I mean because usually you budget
for equipment you buy it in a budgeted
year and it's all nice and tidy and it's
there well
they kind of gave us they kind of gave
us the ability to pay it the next year
right so
the they Leasing Company didn't take the
lease payment until the following year
right but but it's an accounting okay
it's an accounting thing it really
should have been in the year we took
delivery of the of the vehicles what the
Auditors are saying so note to self
we're just not gonna approve that again
it just makes it clear yeah yeah justas
would need would need to record it in
the year in which it it occurred yeah
just no last minute things and
everything sounds fine I don't think
it's a big deal I'm not upset but if if
it sounds too good to be true then it
usually something you know it was it was
a learning curve um yeah didn't didn't
expect that to happen um you know um no
yeah understood but moving moving
forward um so we have we will have an if
it's approved we'll have an addition
125,000 uh put to the uh fund and then
you know the balance uh will be because
of
the
uh the way it's all worked out we're
still going to be less than
$125,000 come this year even though we
haven't had at the you know haven't had
any expenditures in the
account so what I what I had
proposed or you know was going to ask or
uh the forecasted
35,50 will
remain we get an additional
$125,000
and we had a bunch of equipment that we
uh uh Surplus sent to auction this year
at 44,6
se5 um and with the next
payments due lease three uh the the
third payment for the tractor and the
fourth payment in
20526 would leave us a forecasted
balance of 98,0
451 and
change um you'd have to see this all on
paper and that Capital purchasing plan
reflects all that uh and then as new
drops are made into the budget there'll
be some small incremental increases
become
uh forecasted out for fiscal year
2930 will be back into deficit deficits
again for the next I think it's five six
years and I haven't planned anything out
beyond that so and they kept and they
keep increasing and that's part of that
is due to the planned uh truck
replacement every 5 years and that goes
back to what I was uh going to talk to
you about or uh was over the past three
years other than routine maintenance
along with some minor repairs our Fleet
of vehicles equip and equipment is in
good shape
overall however I'd like to show point
out some information regarding sign
significant repairs to a couple of Aging
pieces of equipment does not include
routine maintenance or minor
repairs and basically just want to point
out how important it is that we stay on
the plan consider the plan we can Mo
shift things a little bit but there
isn't a lot of room if we want
to keep good running and operating uh
equipment so uh our 2014
Peterbilt plow truck it's 11 years old
has 4 4
3,263 miles over the past 3
years we've uh some of the significant
repairs we've had consists of
replacement of a cracked cylinder head
and related Parts due to exhaust gases
getting into coolant system replacement
of six fuel injectors and related Parts
due to loss of power
underload injectors one through five
under pressure specs injector six failed
replacement of exhaust catalyst system
and related Parts due to failure and
Joints rotting out due to
corrosion replacement of Turbo actuator
an inlet knock sensor and related Parts
due to low engine power replacement of
air dryer assembly due to
corrosion replacement of fuel rail fuel
lines and related Parts due to fuel rail
and line starting to leak rusting total
cost of these repairs including outside
labor was
$449,450 over a 3year period
approximately uh $99,000 of that was
outside labor because we couldn't do it
inhouse the rest of that four
4,551 was cost of Parts
only that truck currently is scheduled
for replacement in
2029 will then become the backup plow
truck for the next following five years
and rotate it out in 20 34 to be sold at
auction so you can see over you know 11
12 years we've had the truck we're this
is the point where we're starting to put
money into it and you know we're going
to keep it going for another five
years and or you know till 2029 and then
we'll rest it and just use it for uh you
know as a backup truck so we won't use
it so much so you start to uh drop on
the amount of Maintenance and hopefully
because of these repairs we don't have
any other major but you never know at
some point as a age we start putting
money into them it's just nature of the
Beast our 2006 John Deere 410 uh
backo 19 years old
5,836 hours some of the significant
repairs Diagnostics repair El ronics
replacement of electronic display
panel repair to front axle left side
wheel replacement planetary parts and
seals diagnose repair electronics and
throttle linkage power Cuts in and out
linkage warn replacement for fuel
injectors fuel rail and related parts
replacement of pins and bushings for
main boom replacement of pilot control
shocks replacement of electron ronic
controller uh total cost of these
repairs including outside labor was 12,0
5,156 of that was outside
labor because we couldn't do that
inhouse and the rest
7,112 was Parts only this backo is
scheduled for replacement in
2030 but at that time a re-evaluation
will have to be done when we get closer
to the replacement date due to the fact
the machine remains in good shape being
used less
overall
introduction of the excavator now taking
on much of its past
work overall cost of repairs keep it at
Peak Performance has not been out of the
norm so that's just a couple of the
pieces that we've been spending some
out of the norm dollars on most
everything else is all within the realm
of uh
um regular routine
maintenance that does give us a good
overview and I do like hearing those
things and I'm sure I know you said that
you've sent it to us in the past and we
can review it I don't know I didn't mean
to just jump in mark But y it's good I
mean there's just so many needs in the
town that we you know you get a fire and
this is what happen so but you're giving
us the background of what you know a
rotation means and hopefully providing
good maintenance from your department
from within again I know how key that is
to vehicles and everything and yeah I
mean it's it's a process with everything
and balancing all the the wants and
needs and all of that and the definite
needs so that's all I wanted to say I
appreciate it from you know my household
is a mechanic and does these kind of
things and I know all about this stuff
and you know wanted I appreciate hearing
about that you know and works in a town
and plows and all that kind of stuff so
it it's a big part of our town it's a
huge part of our budget you know so
thank you for giving us a little
overview
welcome okay we have any other questions
for Jay while we got
[Music]
them so since you got them uh here
do you want to go over because it is one
of the bigger line items that the town
has expenditures for out of the road
Improvement fund because if you guys
really are going to cut
Capital there's the guy you need to talk
to that controls most of the the capital
funding
expenditures and what do we have for
Road Improvement for
$410,000 is recommended that's flat from
last time
put up the capital fund do you have that
Eric or can we put that up and we could
ask you
know give me a few second not lengthy
not lengthy question you know the
spreadsheet don't we have is it okay to
just put that yeah and then if we had a
tab we wanted you to pick up on it just
it helps thank you so there is the very
basic outline of
that expenditures I need to go for the
spring and the end of this year
beginning of next year yeah can you zoom
in a little bit Eric just a little bit
Eric his old eyes thank you I know all
of us where I'm I'm like leaning I'm all
the way in my screen here my nose is
touching the screen I need I need I need
read glasses um can I ask a quick Eric
question um Eric could you remind me how
far in we are many years ago now we did
a whole Road survey and came up with
like a 10-year plan how far into that
are
we um we're changed quite a bit off the
initial
plan we've got about two years to
go to do the first pass complete pass on
all the town's roads but just basic
stuff just shim and Chip sealed so not a
lot in there in terms terms of uh you
know major renovation projects where
where this is just basic pavement
maintenance stuff if if memory serves uh
when that plan was developed the
decision was made to kind of maintain
the roads that were in decent shape so
they didn't deteriorate because it's
super expensive once they've kind of
gone into failure but we did have some
roads in failure and those were going to
be really expensive we haven't gotten to
them
right we
have oh okay so that's where that shim
and Chip came into play
um uh Eric can I do you have the
map that I made up that maybe they could
see
no uh because I do but I would have to
share my
screen I have a hard copy of it I don't
have an electronic copy
I do if you want me to put it up sure
you just have to let me share it yep
I'll do that right
now sorry for the detour detour all but
uh you should be able to share
now all right where's the share
[Laughter]
button bottom oh wait a minute share
screen Green Arrow yep up Arrow yeah
it's it's under more
I share screen
okay uh let's see where's my
desktop
Okay
no Okay how do I share my
desktop you should hit the little green
up arrow that says share it's right in
the middle at the bottom show you a
bunch of screens and you select the one
you want to yeah you you click on the
one you want to share and you say share
yeah if you want to yeah well I got
screen one two three but it doesn't show
my map of Road treatments how do
I oh wait a minute there it
is okay so highlight it share now I got
it there we go
okay we might need a little
zooming might need some zooming I can't
I mean I'm I'm squinting here yeah um I
mean I can see that help yes nice yes
thank you and maybe just mention the the
well you're gonna do it go ahead yeah
okay so I mean can you see it because
I'll have to move yeah I mean yeah we're
kind in the Northwestern part but yeah
okay all right so we
started let see if I can bring here at
the
bottom let me try backing it out a
little bit so you can all right can you
see that okay yeah yes different so the
roads that we've covered over the past
uh well almost five years now four years
anyway
um all right so these are the different
types reconstruction paved overlay paav
micro Cape chip seal shim
chip seal okay satisfactory and uh areas
of proposed road work all right so
that's what the town looks like right
now as far as the uh what we've done so
far and when I first came on
board we concentrated in the lake
area Okay uh Bunker Hill
we uh did and a lot of these roads when
you said when you talk about the they
were under
disrepair so we had some of these
smaller roads off the lake main drag
around the lake that was a lot of places
asphalt was missing you could lose a
truck in some spots so um yeah with
discussion with you guys and and the
board of Selectmen and Eric and and uh
just with with the doing the shimming
and
chipping uh we were able to repair these
roads and some areas we did you know
they were s s under such disrepair we
did some double chip which which helped
out
um you know we as a as a department have
to be able to plow the road we have to
plow the road safely I can't have
somebody driving down the road in a
white out and all of a sudden there's no
Road no pavement left and they hit the
other side because they're now they're
into gravel and they hit the other side
and the plow goes on the truck can't do
that so that's why I felt it was
important that we repaired these areas
and seal them all off Lake Area the
whole area fortunately you guys the town
had a pretty good uh Coffer at that time
that uh we could do that it's an
inexpensive most inexpensive uh
procedure that we can really do um and
then we proceeded on
to uh Bear Swamp Long
Hill um area couple other roads I'd have
to you know look back at the list I have
a big memory of Bear Swamp being in
pretty bad shape at one point yep hendy
Road hendy road was
horrendous um you know yes we wanted to
address Jane a lot of drainage but we
could get away with doing minimal on the
drainage and and go back to it at at a
later time um doing you know fixing a
road prematurely before you do drainage
doesn't make a lot of sense in case in a
lot of cases but the cost of
doing uh shim and chip is you know
you're losing Pennies on the dollars if
you got to go back and do drainage if
you actually paved the road you know now
you're losing valuable dollars and you
don't want to do that so we were
concentrating on
driveability um and getting water off
the road and just getting getting the
roads back into shape where that we
could plow them more efficiently and
ultimately in the winter time use less
material as well uh some of the other
areas that you guys did prior to was
like School Road uh you did uh a cape
seal micro seal is a combination chip
seal uh micro seal which is a cape um
and don't that's an alternative
procedure uh you know we you did Chip
seal in some areas like in towns of road
so the these are so we're close to
hitting all the roads in some of these
areas we have to go back and do some
other minor repairs because things crop
up again especially in the bad
Frost
um crack seal crack seal is very
important so we want we want to spend
money on crack seal we want to keep the
water out of the road
um I know you guys just worked on my
road recently um I saw you out there
remember um you know and that patched it
up a bit uh is that on the I see it sort
of highlighted as a as a proposal is
that is this kind of older or is that
actually proposed for next year no it's
it's actually part of this Year's money
um for Budget approved great no
so well Gilead Road con
Road um wind Rush gotta wind rush we
want to talk there's want to do
something different over there that
Road's in pretty good shape we might
just try to do a micro seal on that um
you know it's still in really good shape
we don't really we go in uh uh
crack seal that and Chip seal or micro
seal that we could put that to rest for
a long time um I I shouldn't say long
time but a good amount of time got it uh
shotty uh yeah I don't want to get ahead
of myself Gilead Road con Road what's on
the yeah Long Hill shty Mill well no
shotty Mill's different uh so for this
for spring all right we're talking for
chip seal before uh to spend out of this
year's dollars that's already in place
um Gilead
con this section of long hill down to
Woodbridge and Skinner Hill so okay
those those roads we shimmed in
uh was it
mid-fall we did in the fall they were in
real pretty bad shape a lot of some you
know some deep wheel ruts some areas
actually were starting to show gravel um
so uh cone roads horrendous we're going
to before we do that we want to cut the
edges of the road really well the
shoulders we want to try to get the
water off the road so it doesn't stay in
there but
um so those roads are are slated to be
done before uh July one hey Jay can I
ask you a question sure going back up to
Skinner Hill yes just always been a
curiosity like it seems like as you're
going down the road if going north I
guess you call it or east one side of
the road seems to be centry the other
side is Andover how is that true like
how does that how's that you know yeah
so that section of uh Skinner you see my
cursor in here yeah that's like a
gadiva gadiva is you know it's a little
culdesac little short road with a
culdesac that's centry but there's a
section of Skinner Road just right in
that area of Gyer that's actually centry
right um but you know centry and
it's it's it's a short length it's a
short piece you know centry has done
some work for us they did some work on
Woodbridge and basically we're just kind
of trading work so that that's the
bigest question right where Woodbridge
comes into Skinner Road right now is
really bad right where Woodbridge hits
Skinner yeah so I I would imagine that's
going be more than just chip sealed but
or well we have to do some shimming in
there okay we'll do some patching and
and we'll shim it and you know what
you're seeing there on uh at that
intersection is nothing compared to what
we've already done not that it's not
that it's a perfect science it gets us
out of a hot water for a period of time
and you still gota the thing about this
area like Olive
handy and uh long this section of long
hill through Skinner there's a lot of
drainage in here that needs to be done
we need to start uh concentrating in
this area and replacing cross culverts
and basins and we've got some other
areas in town that need it as well but
right now we're trying to hold these
roads
in kind of keep them in place so we can
start going back and and uh maintaining
these and and keep them in a a
consistent manner that is safe for
everybody to travel on
and we don't have all these pot bowls
and Hazards right uh Bernett Brook is is
another one that's needs some work but
that's on next year's uh
2526 uh so any questions about the
map I just want to say thank you uh I
hope everybody else is okay with the
long digression there that I asked about
but um this was really helpful for me
thank you J thank you no thank you
appreciate it I can make this available
to you guys if you want me to send a
email out to oh yeah love that would be
great thank you yeah that would be great
just tell me who to send it to and I can
or all of you or one to that you can
share Jay if you want to send it to me
I'll send it out to everybody I don't
mind I know you've emailed me before so
okay send it to you Joanne yeah I'd be
happy to just I mean just unless you
want to type in everyone email address
but no that's that's that's fine yeah
I'll take care of it when you s I think
that's great for all of us to see and
then we reference um I know we had the
spreadsheet up in there where Eric had
the balances and you know the planned
rest of the work for this year and then
next year so good to see yeah so
speaking of this year before we leave
the map and Eric puts his screen back up
so we can uh but so shotty Mill Road
Ridge Road
uh and burnat Brook right I have I have
burnat Brook this year no next year no
no next year no I do oh that's I'm sorry
yeah well I'm for fiscal year
2526 I don't have burnap highlighted
because I didn't I must have missed that
for some reason but uh Bernat Brook 76
six miles um that is on my list
Hickory uh Aspen burnap Ridge Road and
Burch Drive uh for next for
2526 the remaining of shotty millroad
and Webster Lane uh is
what uh I had for
2526 so let me get out of this map I'll
stop the sharing Eric can bring put his
back up
and we'll I'll
explain there's any questions on the the
line items for 2425 and
2526 um Jay Jay do you guys also handle
the tree work and stuff uh yes we do is
that a l item we have not yet gotten to
or well tree work uh just that one's
real easy look uh you guys have been uh
uh earmarking 50,00 ,000 a year uh we've
been staying pretty much well below that
I shouldn't say well below but you know
uh it's it's given us uh enough money to
do what we need to do basically I spend
somewhere I'd have to look it up but
somewhere but around the $40,000 Mark
and I usually have something left over
to get started into the next year before
new money comes in um we've done a lot
of work with eversource a lot of Co Ops
um matching monies uh this year we
didn't really get to do that too much um
but eversource came in and has done a
tremendous amount of work uh for us like
on shotti and burnap and um you know and
and then we've gone behind them without
exchanging any money we've got we've
assisted them by picking up some of the
wood um you know it's in their right
away our right away if they're willing
to take the trees down for nothing I'm
more than willing to help pick up the
wood you know what absolutely What the
residents don't take themselves so so
Jay quick quick so is the focus on on
the tree um work
um more on dead trees that I know
there's quite a few trees I could I
could point out that are like ready to
fall down dead right next to the road
ash trees and it just always blows my
mind that we leave certain trees up that
are dead ready to fall and and in my
opinion pose quite the threat and then
there's other trees like we just you
know crop back it seems like and I love
getting the crop the you know the
overhead moved back so the Sun comes in
and you know helps you know melt the
roads keep the roads clear so I just
wasn't sure where the focus was but I I
could drive around like there's certain
roads I I hit Wheeling road all the time
and there's like dead ash trees that are
just right there ready to fall dead as a
door nail and I'm like why do we skip
over certain Tre
it just seems I don't know what the what
the f I would like to answer that
question and just say yes okay because
you know we we've gone down quite a few
roads got them done to the you know what
we think we've you know all right we're
in good shape we move on to the next
Road and you know a month later half a
dozen trees have died off that weren't
dead you know when we left um and they
just keep cropping up but you know the
the good news is that is that we do come
back to them uh and do them and
sometimes we either run out of money or
time or a different project comes up and
we got to leave things alone a little
bit but the the the
tree uh plan as as I'll call it has been
uh trying to raise the canopy let the
sunlight in uh take out the compromised
trees the dead trees and the trees that
are a hazard to the
roadway if they're
marginal like you know if they're really
close to the road and somebody's going
to clip them I I elect to take those uh
trees out and we'll get the stumps grind
such as burnat Brook Bernette Brook was
bad and there was a lot of dead trees
there and and you know then we get these
hard
leaners um that they're just you know
the next Windstorm they're going to fall
so we'll take those out so the
straighter the better raising the canopy
the better um and um you know service re
reliability of the utilities uh that's
kind of uh what we've been trying to
strive on um and getting the shoulders
of the road clear somebody needs to pull
over I'd like to have a safe place for
them to pull over the trees that we can
groom and let
grow as time goes on you know we'll just
trim them so they grow straighter we try
to do that as
well okay like there's just a few trees
in my mind that are like been dead for
many many years as trees that are right
in the edge of the road and I'm just
like why do they keep skipping over
these trees but well Bill Bill if you
see something say something okay I was
gonna say you know who to call right
give me a call I'll put him on the list
because I have a long list all right
we'll go for a ride someday and to put
that in perspective if if you look at
the trees within the towns right away
based on the uh number of road miles we
have there's roughly 40,000 trees in the
towns right away and you think that
across all species the average life
expectancy of a tree is around 80
years so you can another way of looking
at that is saying your your basic level
from the towns right away is about 400
dead trees per year in the towns right
away not including Ash boore or anything
that provides really accelerated die off
so between us and the utility company
just to maintain status quo you're
taking 400 plus trees a year out of the
town that put it in perspective
yeah and we've been averaging when uh we
hire a contractor to do our tree work um
we've been averaging somewhere between
call it 270 to
$340 per tree to have it
removed so depending on you know some
some days you know when we come in and
do mult have them there here for
multiple days and you put them in an
area they don't have to do a lot of
Bounce around they can get a lot done
but if they have to move you know from
one side of the town and remobilize and
pick up you know sometimes the it's less
so it averages out about about that
cost
super okay Jay if we're done with the
tree questions are we gonna Circle back
or you g to tell us something about the
roads y yeah the road work sure yeah did
ER
put did he put up the uh
y
okay there we go all right so uh for
this year's work remainder 2425
currently we have $646,000
in that uh Road Improvement
fund so I have uh I'd like to finish the
guard rails on Long Hill approximately
1,000 ft at
30,000 like to spend uh some money on
crack seal throughout the town about
$50,000 um pavement markings is is
typically around
30,000 a little less could be a little
more I earmarked for
um and uh we need to stock up on our
drainage products we need to get uh some
uh pipe and catch Basin structures uh so
we can continue with that work in
different areas of town and then the
chip sealed plan roads um Long Hill
Skinner Gilead Co and some additional
shimming and pavement repairs that we
didn't uh finish up with on those in
those
areas so that's that's where that money
comes from for and that would leave a
balance of about
$156,000 in the
account before any new money comes
in um
and my question can I just so so that's
what it is basically is we have a
running account there that's the whole
idea of having this funding so it's
available for you as you guys have the
time you know multiple projects or
whatever so we will have a little bit
left at the end of the year hopefully
and then just keep building on it okay
right sorry didn't we I know you were
going to go into the and then this is
just your wish list of what you would
use the whole to the next year is that
what year yes yeah so for for uh Hickory
Aspen burnout Road Ridge Road Birch
Drive
um and and I'm estimating a standard
shim and chip on that that we've been
doing um at about
74,0
675 uh that's for the estimate of Chip
seal only for uh
asphalt the contractor and uh because we
hire an asphalt contract or the paving
company to come out right I try to
budget for $95,000 for them and Asault I
budget for a th000 tons at $98 per ton
so it's a 95,000 and 98,000 for those
Jay you skipped Cape seal what is Cape
seal yeah oh I'm sorry
yeah so the uh shot for shotty Mill Road
and Webster Lane so as as you recall uh
shotty Mill Road was part of uh a uh or
part of shotty was part of a
reconstruction project we did a couple
years ago um did a lot of drainage over
there and we stopped uh just past Wales
road so we would like to finish that
road up and put it to rest for you know
uh quite a few years um so the road uh
the rest of that road is in pretty good
shape with the with the exception of a
couple sections that need to be uh uh
dug up and put put in some good material
and have paved um and then uh and then
we can do a a chip seal micro seal over
them that's what Cape seal is so they
they chip seal the road and then they
come back and they uh do a micro seal
over
it um which is a I call it kind of a
slurry concrete aspal Emulsion it's what
they did on school
road several years quite a few years ago
I don't know if you saw that operation
or whatnot but it basically the chip
seal they put it down they wait a little
bit they sweep it up and then they come
back and uh put the micro seal down
which gives it a smoother surface
um and uh it's more like a
uh it's kind of a like a concrete
substance but it's but it's asphalt you
know they mix uh
uh concrete product in with the with the
emulsions and that's what cap uh Cape
seal
is uh and then also Webster Lane Webster
Lane's a small area in town we've done
some drainage improvements over there
there we've got a little bit more to do
when there's one other catch space and
we got to do replace a couple tops we
could put that area to rest for a while
um and it you know it would be
done uh because at some
point the town if you if you look at the
different uh uh processes
of Road of asphalt replacement
maintenance um the there's different
things you can do so you know you can't
keep doing chip sealing forever uh you
know you can put layers and layers and
layers and eventually it's going to
build up and then it just kind of makes
these deep wheel ruts and that's no good
eventually you got to start putting
asphalt on the road you got to Recon do
reconstruction
so we've got to create a plan do things
hand
inand uh you do a little less of one
thing one year and a little more of
another another year so you know one
year you may concentrate just on
reconstruction you know the next year
you then you go back to your chip seal
uh uh nobody likes chip seal terrible
process but it works and you know
everybody has done it's uh you know
things that uh happen with that you know
the downside of it it's you know rough
uh not to walk on it's dusty till we get
it all swept up and and uh you know it
gets rained on after a while but
eventually it all Blends in um it's just
you know average cost of shim and Chip
per mile is about
$70,000 where reclaiming of of of a mile
of a road is almost
$500,000 so you know you can do a lot
more with one than another
um so I think that was great I mean I
don't want to I don't want to keep you
all night I know you have an early
morning too I know Mark I'm not trying I
I feel like he gave a good overview of
the things that we would have questions
for or the needs and all of
that yeah for sure it's really nice to
kind of hear the the outline and the
plan you know in a way that you know we
haven't really had before I think
so the roads look the best they've ever
had since I lived in town so thank you
Jay and Eric and select men and
everybody else yeah and the taxpayers
who have agreed to could fund it at a
higher rate than we had before we're
still still catching up right still
catching up you know understandably you
know it's there's give and take with
everything you know in
total uh for this year between uh
uh cap the capital drop that you guys
and do and then the uh tar you know
we're looking at $610,000
so
$410,000 drop from the town and then uh
from town Aid Road uh we'd need
185,000 and 15,000 would be the balance
that we would uh take from leftover
Monies you know from last year so the
things that I proposed come to $610,000
do we have to do them
all if we can't we can't I'd like to do
as much as I can um you know and
understandably you know we're all going
to have to take some cuts and and just
have to uh decide what we put off for
another year that's all it's you know
it's what we've had to do before um and
you know we can do that but uh you know
$410 is what we're you know has been the
annual drop for the capital Road
expenditures from the town
typically okay Mark can I take like
three minutes and just do big picture
stuff related to Road and the road
Network sure I think so okay so the town
of Andover has 34 miles of roadway
that's Town Road there's also a bunch of
state roads Route 6 route
316 uh Boston
Hill um we're not responsible for those
we don't spend any money maintaining
them or plowing them or anything so that
34 miles of Road the kind of asset cost
of that is about
$34
million is what the town has an aode
asset in terms of large bridges and by
large I mean large enough that it
qualifies for the federal local bridge
program the town owns about $18 million
in Bridge asset or
will after the Long Hill bridge is
replaced of the four large bridges that
the town has uh one was replaced in
2017 one is being replaced now one will
be replaced in
2027 and the other one was replaced in
the mid to late 80s so the good news is
that in terms of large
bridges um by around 2029 the town will
have addressed all of its large Bridge
assets um and should not occur any major
maintenance for those assets you know
for the next 20 to 30 years where we're
going to suffer is in the uh small
bridge and Culver
category um currently we have four of
them that are rated either poor or
failing um of which one of them is
currently in enrolled in the state local
bridge program and should be on the
schedule for summer 2026 report
placement that Culver is on Long Hill or
correction on Lake Road right near uh
Bola um and that's about a
$1.9 million project about which the
town is on the hook for half um there is
another pretty well failed Culvert on uh
be swamp that's concerning because it's
a culdesac and if that fails um the town
is going to struggle to be able to
access some of the residents um and you
know we have a bunch more so over the
next 10 or so
years uh the one area where we're going
to have the biggest
shortfall is in what we're putting in
bridges and Culvert
funds but I also get that the town can
only spend so much money and we're only
going after large culverts when we apply
for and get the state local bridge uh
get accepted into the state local bridge
program right now of the of the bridges
that are tried to be Grant funded within
the state the success rate is about 30%
so the state currently has enough money
set aside to fund the repair and
replacement of about of their part um of
about a third of the ones that are
applied so that's kind of what we're
faced with um I've been lobbying for a
couple of years now um to see whether
the state will increase the bond funding
for the state local bridge program and
also whether the state will consider uh
you know increasing the state's funding
share for that to
75% um there are couple of bills pending
in this year's
legislature um you know this is an issue
that we've gotten both uh the Council of
small
governments um or correction Council of
small towns as well as the the Regional
Council of governments to back um but
you know of the two or three th000 bills
that come up that represents one or two
so no guarantees that there will be Bond
funding increase but in terms of what
are the catastrophic things we're going
to have to deal with as a town that's
where we're really going to run into
some serious dollars and just for
planning purposes if the town was to
reclaim its entire Road Network it would
take about a $17 million bond package
and if the town were to fix all its
failing culs um without enrollment in
the uh State local bridge program it
would be somewhere around between 10 and
11 million on today's current numbers so
that's what you're faed with in terms of
capital issues that the town has
currently Joanne I just had one followup
question on because Colts I don't is
there like you to said that there was a
few that were on the very low scale is
there ever a time that someone comes in
and says close this road you've got to
do this now I mean obviously we're
operating on a get to the worst first I
don't need like the longest but you know
just a quick little answer on that like
is there anywhere in town that someone's
saying this has to happen have we gotten
a letter by the inspection people saying
they have to get repaired by a certain
date so here's the Scoop the state of
Connecticut does not inspect Bridges
well you you have the terminology I
don't whoever inspects it sorry I'm just
learning as I go so towns are on the
hook for that most towns don't uh really
inspect their own cult s on any kind of
regular basis we did have a pay to have
an engineer uh inspect all of our
culverts and give us a repair list about
five years ago um there is currently one
road that is been uh one lane has been
blocked off now for five years because
the end wall has failed um and we don't
have the money to repair that Culver
that's on Hutchinson Road no thank you
for that over rview I just wondered like
you know catastrophic or and you know
have we gotten any warnings from
whatever agency or whatever whoever is
in control of that decision okay thank
you and Eric just for me just kind of
looking speaking about the Culvert so
the the expected cost of the
um of the Culvert at uh I'm sorry I'm
trying to get back there Lake Road at
Bola yeah is is
966 uh ,000 more or less the combined
fund of the bridg and culbert fund plus
the recommended fund for this coming
year is only $729 so that leaves us a
shortfall you know about
$140,000 and I think we were talking
about maybe moving that from uh from the
general fund or something to cover that
because we're going to so do we have a
plan for I'm trying to remember what if
that we discussed that in detail so
because the construction season will be
next summer and with a little luck it
will bridge two fiscal years it's not
likely to be done by July 1 I'm
anticipating using part of next year's
Capital
funding uh to pay for that also because
I I recognize you know we don't have um
we don't have the money currently um we
could never budget enough in the last
couple in the last Cycles to get to
there um so basically what we've done is
I've kind of slow walked the design and
Engineering for that that covert we've
gotten another extension which allows us
to do the work next year we'll do it
next summer and we'll bridge two more uh
fiscal or one more fiscal year so got it
if we did a flat funding it would just
about cover it and give us a 10 the
$20,000 additional so the note says here
for 2026 construction season just didn't
know what if it was only that season so
okay all right so that's the strategy to
cover that okay yep won't leave unless
you want to put another 150,000 into it
this year but it doesn't seem like
that's uh too likely to
happen oh thank you for all the
explanations Jay thank you for all your
time am thank you well thank you for
having me and uh I appreciate the the
patience with my
explanations appreciate it Jay thanks a
lot thank you Jay thank you and thank
you Eric additional information have a
good night
night okay well if we're done with
covering the public works then that
would take us to uh old business uh 5A
which is review a budget I'm sorry 5B it
would be review a budget to
actual um I guess what I would suggest
is if Eric if there's any specific
things we need to take a look at here if
you'd highlight them I haven't looked at
it if anybody has any questions yeah
looked at it in detail just a couple of
things
but anything we need to look at your
thing serious at this point the only
thing we've identified that we will go
over right now
that we know of categorically is we will
go over the maintenance line item for
senior
Transportation because we are looking at
a fairly significant expense for uh one
of the vehicles coming up shortly um and
we only have about 3,000 left in that
line item um so we're going to go over
probably three or 4,000 in senior
transportation in the vehicle
maintenance
category okay but nothing we can't we
have not touched any
uh you know we're we're not even close
to to having to take anything from
contingency at this point so overall
we're looking pretty good in the
budget um the only other line item that
we know will be over and it's going to
depend at some point when the actual
transition is is because the zoning
agent
retired um and we ended up hiring a
zoning agent that had zero EXP
experience with zoning um because
there's just nobody qualified willing to
work for uh you know a part-time
position at the kind of pay rates that
we offer um there is a long transition
period between between the two
individuals the outgoing and the
incoming so we've had we're going to end
up having about four months where we're
paying both individuals so you by
transition period you're talking about
an overlap so that you can do on the job
training Etc
right exactly
exactly
yepes anybody have any questions for
Eric on specifically on the current
budget actual for this fiscal
year not at this time no no and and I'm
happy to share it if you want to see the
bring it up and look at specific line
items nope I'm Al set thank you no I
looked earlier today no problem all good
yep
good okay well if nobody has anything
further on there um we could go to Five
C which would be the check register but
as I think uh either Liz or or uh J
pointed out that's the actually the old
one so there's probably not much to
review
there awesome we'll move on if nobody
has any objections so then that would
take us we omitted five or the
established the banking relationship
with Webster which will leave us the
discuss the Board of Ed stiff account
request I thought we had ascertained
that there could not be a separate
account um separate we gotten past that
I had are we on the stiff account thing
yeah I I was only GNA give a little tiny
update I'm the one that because um you
know they had asked about it I had
reached out to Cheryl and she was nice
enough to get back to me so I'm just
gonna it was in my head earlier I'm just
going to kind of um Cheryl let me know
that
she is in favor of them um and has
reached out and sent over information of
how to establish a stiff account to put
their 2% non-aps funds in so that that
could remain um let me just she's
forwarded to them a few times of how to
contact the State of Connecticut stiff
Department to have their own stiff
account created for that 2% non- loping
fund so she thought um I asked her a
variety of questions she told me how the
stiff account now is set up for the town
and that's the account that has all of
the one
second obviously has the funds being
deposited and withdrawn all the time
like we said so the the balance would
vary the amounts of interest you earn
will vary on that so that was just kind
of a
little uh since the balot balance FL
fluctuates monthly in our interest earn
charges based on the cash needs of the
town so we knew that we had established
that and then for the AES Capital fund
because I believe they've talked about
that that account does have its own
account currently with MNT but the
finance office is meeting Eric probably
knows this already is meeting with
Webster Bank to possibly set up a money
market account and to move the capital
items into it because it's been promised
to give the same amount of return that a
stiff account
does
um and then if the finance office
decides to move forward with the new
money market account each Eric is this
okay for me to be saying this it's just
yep do you have a problem with it I mean
I don't want to it's just Financial yeah
so I I might as well read it because
give us summary it's just kind of good
to get so she just right so she said if
the finance off office decides to move
forward with forward with the new Mone
market account each Capital fund that is
maintained there will have the interest
earned monthly allocated to that fund
based on the relative balance so kind of
what AES was asking us earlier if they
did deposit their Fund in a stiff
account you know where would all the
interests go so we're kind of back to
that thing so it sounds like the finance
office is exploring a couple different
things that will earn the town the same
kind of interest that the stiff account
already receives again I don't want to
speak to that more especially tonight my
brain's a little tired um but yeah
Cheryl's been in touch with AES as far
as if they want to put create a stiff
account for their 2% nonlinguistic
accounts special accounts for this and
for that right right and I wasn't per se
necessarily thinking that all the
interest had to get divided either
because we said we're rolling it back it
overall helps the town so I think we're
at square one I think Cheryl was
educating me because I asked some
specific questions um so I just wanted
to update you all since I had reached
out about that definitely the 2% non-aps
they're going to look for their own
stiff account and that's what they
wanted so okay thanks Joan welcome
thanks thank
you okay if we can move on then I guess
that takes us to new business which uh
we added the item for the ahm
contribution from
Andover um
so Louise had put out a um a recording
of the of the meeting I haven't had had
a chance to watch it so I haven't seen
it um do you have the number or the
amount Louise
handy no I don't I'm sorry all I want to
say is basically um I went through it
and it's a very favorable organization
and they're doing excellent with it um
they have a lot of referrals uh from 23
to 24 they have 2,000 Mental Health
appointments a uh appointments
and so far this year they've had
1,400 so it's it's it's growing and it's
very beneficial and um we are actually
based on the granting and the funds that
we're getting on it and also the uh
sharing of the space we're actually
getting something at 60% discount
because actually it's it would cost us
60% of uh what we're actually getting
for that money
so I kind of vote Yes and they basically
said no one has ever voted
no yeah we've always approved it on the
municipal and the other towns have
already voted and uh I just wanted to
give a you know let everyone else know
about it and see what they feel about it
they feel the same as I do Louise I feel
like the budget was something like a
little bit over a 100,000 for this year
for the Andover portion it's
$6,950 yeah which is a 4.3% increase
over last year I mean it just goes up a
little bit each year I have to agree
with Louise my little two senses working
in a school system you know the amount
of Mental Health appointments or visits
to the social workers or psychologists
or testing skyrocketed it's it's keeps
going going so if we're able to you know
get the services through ahm you know
with what they provide if that's a big
part I'd be in favor of it
too it's actually a good deal what was
the number you had uh Eric
um 106
953 yep okay one I got it okay I I can
yeah this just for reference the uh
there was an email that came out from
Kate on January 28 that had the
reference materials I had I knew we had
it had to go back and look at it um so
yeah andover's portion last year was
2,528 um this year is
10695 3 is our
Levy so I guess I would say Louise you
want to make a motion to uh approve the
uh Levy
of andover's yeah
106,50 yes I want to make a motion to
for Andover to accept the municipal
amount of 10
what what was it
10695 I'll second that okay we have
further
discussion all those in favor say I I I
any
opposed any
extensions okay hearing none the motion
passes thank you Louise I appreciate
your participation and keeping us on top
of that thank you all oh Eric will you
be supplying
your um vote from the B the
BOS I will not I think the BOS is going
to authoriz right PR to vote for the
board of Select okay but that's up to
them all right thanks but it also
doesn't matter because with you they
have five five ofer rid of votes so
their budget's passed and it's it's
established anyway yeah
okay okay then that would take us to
item seven on our agenda which is board
open discussion I have um what else we
got Joanne yeah I just wanted to mention
in case I know I sent an email around
that the superintendent has accepted our
request to uh speak at an earlier budget
meeting so she'll and I can send
something to Eric and Kate to have it
put on the agenda if you want me to mark
yeah that'd be good I I saw everything I
just hadn't done it yet so I think
that's the only if you want to as you
suggested if you think we ought to have
it and that's next week it's next week
so they're going to come speak to us on
March 5th um she it was originally going
to be the 19th which is later in our
cycle and last week we decided in our
open discussions that if we could push
that Eric I forget if the ram
superintendent we haven't given him a
date yet we're g we
can I was no we gave him a date I just
don't know off the top of my head what
that date was I thought that was the
19th no yeah I sort of feel like that
was was plugged in on the 19th AES well
good I was just hoping we didn't have
the Ram super intendent for the 5th but
we might have to send him a an
email I thought it was 19th but okay I
would have to I can tell you that in a
few seconds if you give me a few seconds
yeah yeah of course and that's my only
open discussion because I know the
meeting's gone long I just wanted to
point that out and we'll be ready for
that next week yeah I think I think i'
given originally i' given Valerie the
5th or the 12th she said the 12th is
Board of edge she wanted to do the 19th
so we said
okay and um don't anything specifically
on the ram I'm not sure I think we might
have said that I think we might have
said the 12 for Ram correct oh good that
works yeah so back to back we'll have
the two School budgets
yeah right and so you know Ram released
a new budget uh they approved a budget
that was somewhat lower which was
awfully nice and then they also agreed
to return the unexpended fund balance
back to the town good so that ised last
year at least part of on our overall
budget is there can people remind me is
our Levy leveled off or are we going
down again down going down a little bit
Yeah the levy went down a little bit
1299 or something
er uh
so the total Ram budget now is a
decrease year-over-year of about
$166,000 for our contribution yeah okay
that's a nice roughly flat but yeah okay
and they're going up a little bit but
we're again the ratio ratio y they
actually when I read it real quick that
letter that Eric had included in his
budget things sounds like their their
audit came back that they had in Surplus
something like a million and three I
want to say they're keeping 2% in their
non-linguist but so they had that you
know plus they decreased their Capital
so they they did make a couple cuts
along the
way but they were a million three over
I've been pretty pleased with how they
their Board of vet has gotten their act
together um over the last five 10 years
uh so that's good that's a help so this
is where we are
currently with the three changes that
the board of
Selectmen uh initiated at their meeting
yesterday so the town budget is
currently an increase of about
84,000 which is
2% the ram budget overall is down about
.4% and the endover elementary school
budget is still up uh
381,000
um so as we know there there is
something going through the legislature
that may or may not have been fully
approved
today but they are the legislature is
giving the towns a method
for increasing
the uh or decreasing the depreciation
schedule for
automobiles as most of you remember
there was a significant change in how
automobiles are valued which dropped our
overall uh Grand list by about
2% almost everybody across the state too
about half of
that if the board of Selectmen adopts
that so that would um back to you know
knock the overall mill rate
increase
um you know down somewhat but it's it's
still a pretty healthy mill rate
increase right
now okay so that's where we're at
overall okay any other board open
discussion on the budget or anything
else
I'm good as far as I'm concerned sorry I
had to move locations
I can you share that updated spreadsheet
or post it up on that link linked uh
folder that you had it yeah this should
be on the linked folder it it well it
wasn't this morning the last one on
there is the is the one that's dated the
25th and this appears to be different
right
yep there's one for the 20th and one for
the 25th I think were the two
um yeah I mean I'll uh I'll verify that
that's what I've been looking at all day
and I didn't think I saw new numbers
yeah just just the two I still have it
up so okay
good yeah all right well if um nobody
has any other discussion we can move on
to
correspondence the uh I you probably you
I think you all were copied on the email
from uh Valerie brunau that had the
letter from the Board of Ed is as well
as the copy of the approved budget did
everybody receive that yep yes okay yep
all right so no need to read it in here
uh you've all received it it's a matter
of the record so and Valerie will
obviously present that next week any
other correspondence that we should
discuss okay well we could move into
public speak but I don't see any members
of the public still with us
what's whose Community
voice that's the recording uh channel
for the uh Community voice access
Community Access channel the record well
you can't see the whole name so you're
excuse yeah thank you hey you know you
gota ask right yeah absolutely I think
usually there's more people on the
screen so I don't always see all the
names going across and I oh yeah
sometimes yeah yeah
um okay before we adjourn I guess um the
only thing I would say is just a little
bit of housekeeping for next meeting
Eric you're not available next week
correct uh no I will be there at
the unavailable huh I will be leaving
the day after I will not be here at the
meeting on the 12th okay ah okay Cheryl
will cover for me on the meeting on the
12th okay
okay I thought it was next week is that
I thought yeah I thought next next week
was the week that I was going to have a
challenge but that may change for me too
so okay all right so next week's not a
problem good
okay okay well if nobody has anything
else then I guess we you entertain a
motion to
adjourn make a motion to adjourn I can
second that who was that Liz okay Kim
Kimberly you got it is that I got okay
sorry was moving the spreadsheet out of
the ways I can see okay any
discussion all those in favor of
adjournment say I hi hi any
oppose no hearing none no no no absens